http://www.cbc.ca/news/young-people-drawn-to-farming-by-income-job-opportunities-1.1668323

Lots of people in the comments complaining about the land barrier. Joel Salatin and others in the sustainable farming circles make a very compelling case for renting land and using portable infrastructure to make a good living farming. The old adage that the farm can pay the mortgage or a salary has been around for a very long time now.


What's needed, are more people on the land and more intensive forms of non-chemical farming practices. Proper mineralization & soil renewal practices are key. A diversified, mixed, 5-25 arce farm can produce an amazing amount of quality produce. A viable & sustainable economy is one that produces more in basic wealth than it consumes. Besides, farming is a healthy & interesting life, where doing becomes more important than observing.


@A. Farmer That is not how it works. The farmer's personal property is the farm house and 1/2 acre of land. All they can write off is the barn, farm vehicles including tractors, wagons and stuff like that. feed, animals and anything directly related to the farm. 

They can not write off their personal vehicle, utilities, property taxes for their house, all household expenses, vet bills for pets, per food, and all other personal items such as clothing, entertainment, trips, etc... 


In theory you are absolutely correct. Take a drive through any church parking lot on a Sunday morning and see how many FT plates or placated business vehicles are there. How many farmers write off food for their pets under "security" or "rodent control"? Put a farm logo on twenty shirts and call them uniforms. Farmers and business people DO write off all sorts of personal expenses, reality is reality.


DaveConstable
We need our farming community so how ever it works out, they must be able to make a good living. Many now farm and at least one member of the family has to work at another job in order to make ends meet. Just because a farm is a multi-million dollar operation , doesn't always mean the operators get a decent wage. - supplies, stock, seed, fertiliser, veterinary bills and medicines, drought, too much rain, freeze-ups, machines and upkeep, and sometimes, the worst of all... government interference.


islandmon2
@DaveConstable Really I know two farmers both in grains both multi million ares. So not sure what kind of farming your talking about. However I do agree in the huge costs that is why the average young person does not have a hope in hell of starting up a farm unless they inherit it. Start up cost are enormous. Take care


youlobbydimwit
What a misleading title. In fact many epople would love to farm but it is way to expensive, even hobby farming. Only those few fortunate enough to follow their parents established farming or huge areas of purshased fertile land and lots of reliable equipment. 
Farmers also get huge money from the tax payer when their is a bad season.



Marx
the problem is the capital expenditures in buying and running a farm....it's nice if you can inherit it from your parents but not many young people have that as an option; btw, the stats still show that family operated farm businesses are becoming a thing of the past with less than 2% considered family operations---also, almost half of the family operations have to be subsidized with off-farm income to remain viable....this has been happening since the early 1950's...it's part of the capitalist development of agriculture



Commontater
Having farmed for 50 years I have seen the boom and bust (not much boom) cycles in farming. Your margins are so small and you have to invest a fortune to make a modest living. Like one farmer said, the way you make a million dollars farming is to start with two million. Not many people with two million want to put it in farming. The best thing to do now if you have money to invest is to buy land and rent it out, don't try to farm it. If you can survive the pitfalls of farming over a long period of time you can grow your equity to a point where it will give you a retirement. If you cannot, you have to farm until you drop since you won't have much other pension to keep you. Corporate farms and investment companies are now gobbling up the available land.


NameLikeNoOther
I don't know about this. If you look at the Capital Cost of upgrading equipment like Tractors, Implements, etc that are typically involved in a new generation taking over a farm and the expected Return On Investment it looks like a very challenging road with bankruptcy a real outcome if there is a failed crop or market crash. I think Kevin O'Leary would say that you would be insane to make this investment. Amanda Lang would probably agree but say it nicer.


jimfrieson
Those saying small farms and/or family farms are gone have never been to Vancouver Island obviously.



Real Deal
I worked almost 18yrs in corporate cubicles and finished University and can say I will never go back and my Business HR Degree was a waste of time. People change. I would love to farm some good old veggies now. Anything really.


countymike
@Real Deal I have a similar background and I did. Corporate life sucks your soul. Get a plan together and do it.


we can no longer afford to hire help 
it must all be done by the one full-time brother 
the other brothers (who all hold full-time jobs in other industries) come and help out when they get done their other workday


Craig Reid
It's great to see the optimism. As for the the folks decrying the fact that you almost need to be born into it, how is that any different from other industries? You don't wake up one day and invest tens of millions of dollars in a factory, or a high-tech firm out of the blue. You enter capital-intensive sectors one of three ways: you inherit, you grow a business from nothing, or you secure high-risk financing. Farming is a high-tech, information dense, capital-intensive venture. Good for all the young folks willing to come home and bet their future on it. I won't argue that foreign ownership, or absentee ownership of the land-base presents challenges, and some caution flags for the future, but they are not insurmountable. As far as everything being corporate owned and worked by slave labour, I would say not likely. It requires a lot of sweat equity to make most businesses run, and farming is no different. I'm glad we took over the family farm in 2008, it hasn't always been easy, but I wouldn't change it.


JimDinNB
You talk about a 580-cow dairy operation, a multi-million dollar vegetable enterprise, and a 4,700 acre grain operation. None of these is a "family farm" and nothing even a fraction the size of these is a viable investment for a young person starting out. In New Brunswick the quota alone for 580 cows would cost in the neighourhood of $20 million, and then you still have to pay for the land, machinery, buildings and cows. What a misleading article. Way to go CBC. 

The only way a young person with no farm to inherit or buy for next to nothing from their parents can make it in agriculture is to start small, keep your debts minimal and sell directly to the local consumer. You will have to work long hours, at least in the spring through fall, and you are at the mercy of mother nature. It is a rewarding lifestyle in many ways, but financially rewarding it is not.


MarcusRiedner
@JimDinNB quota boards and marketing boards really are a core problem for small farm startups. But I disagree that you have to own or inherit the land. There is a seriously good case to be made for portable infrastructure on rented land. There are young startup farmers all across Canada and the US that are turning profits with direct marketing and small operations. I know of two urban farming operations in my area that are making a go of it on under an acre spread across multiple back yards.


countymike
Reading over the comments here, I agree with a big point made: what about those who don't have family farms to "take over" or inherit. Price of land, too much, banks won't lend to anyone wanting to "get into farming". I have a suggestion though that I have some personal experience in. If you live in an urban center, and have your own house to sell, you can easily sell a modest bungalow for over $400K, and buy a comparable house with acres of land attached for half the price in the country. Pay off your debts, get some used farming equipment and start farming. May have to pick up a second job over the winter, but you'll have half your original mortgage payment, and guess what, you'll have a family farm, one that you can pass on to your kids.



MarcusRiedner
@countymike or better yet, don't buy any land. Use portable infrastructure on rented or borrowed land. Every farm has nooks and crannies that a tractor can't get into, and most farmers would love to rent that wasted land out for $15-30/acre/year. In cities people can be found who'll give up yard space. So the land issue can be solved by being a bit creative. 

Portable infrastructure drops your initial investment into the $5000-$15,000 range rather than whatever the price for a combine is these days (let alone the price of land). Scaling up with portable infrastructure is cheaper as well. You can get into pastured poultry for direct marketing, or small scale beef, or dairy sheep/goats. Market gardening and urban farming are options as well.


you are talking about prairie farming. The prairies chiefly raise grains and pulses, commodity crops that must be produced on a massive scale to be profitable, even if they're organic. The rest of the country is much different, agriculturally speaking, than the prairies. In the Maritimes for instance, the largest tractor you would ever see on most farms would be less than 140 hp. That's just a toy in Saskatchewan.


CodieneC
@comments 
only problem is that a lot of prairie farmland is being bought up by corporations (heavily backed by foreign financiers) and most people can't afford to buy more land when the corps investments have driven the prices high 


jensg1
The chances of beginning in farming without having a large amount of capital to invest, or continuing in a family farm, are nearly impossible these days. The cost of land and equipment are just too high. The days of being able to start a small farm and building it up are long gone.


MarcusRiedner
@jensg1 so don't buy land and big equipment. Rent the land, and farm in a manner that doesn't require a tractor. Pastured poultry and eggs is a big profit earner and you can get into that for under $20,000 and a bit of creativity. The bigger issue is the quota and marketing boards that stifle creativity in agriculture, these guys are keeping Canadian food high priced and low quality all in one fell swoop.


seeker444
Small organic farms in Canada can survive. The climate in our area would not be suitable for this type of farm though. Land, here, which is used to produce grains and oilseeds entails hundreds or thousands of acres. The prices in our area include $2000 to over $3000/acre for dryland and anywhere from $4000 to $7000 to $8000/acre for pivot irrigated land. Ranches in the foothills are also generating millions when sold. 
Those who can afford these prices include Hutterite colonies, multigeneration farms, those who have made millions in other industries or fields, recent immigration from European countries who have sold their land for millions of euros and foreign sources. We have also seen European immigration come into our area and set up greenhouses. 
Rumors have it that there is a certain amount of land being purchased in Saskatchewan by interests from China. 
We had a small first generation grains and oilseeds farm which we sold when we decided to not borrow money again to start upgrading our equipment. Also, the price of fuel, seed, fertilizer, chemicals, crop insurance, equipment and much more, is through the roof so the profit margin was lessening which took the fun out of it. The price of the equipment alone forces one to acquire many acres to make it pay. 
There is also the reality of getting older and our children could not have made a go of it with such a small farm by today's standards in our area. So they went to university and are employed in different fields.


MarcusRiedner
@seeker444 so ditch commodity farming. There are a couple grain farms in Alberta that are doing small scale organic operations and direct marketing milled heritage grains to customers. Oilseeds as well. You can also ditch the big equipment all together and move back to pasture based operations and seasonal production - the demand for pastured beef/chicken/pork is super high in Calgary and Edmonton and there are premium price points attached to that demand. A hoophouse can be built for a fraction of the cost of a traditional greenhouse and you can rig them up with cheap heating methods to grow year round, or just use them to extend the growing season 5-6 weeks on each side. Land can be rented instead of owned, in fact all of the big commodity grain farmers I've talked to rent more land than they own, because as you say it is stupid expensive to buy land.


whymeLord
@A Concerned Citizen Even a small farm is a multi-million dollar enterprise. The article, however, does a poor job of explaining that for many years the net farm sales of commodities and livestock often barely covered the massive expenses (input costs, fuel, equipment, etc.) therefore resulting in a very small net income if they actually made money at all.


whatthehe77
@A Concerned Citizen they are two different things one is farming and the other is raping the land for profit 
do not always believe the slogan " farmers feed cities" because many of them are not! if you go to the grocery store and look at the food you will see MOST of it comes from China!! so where is the food going produced here??


MarcusRiedner
@Layman Browser Killing the Wheat Board monopoly is one of the few good things Harper has done for this country's agriculture backbone. Every grain farmer I know as seen an increase in revenue and profit now that they can openly sell on the market at FAIR market prices. Here's hoping he kills the quota boards, because those yahoos are killing small farmers and costing consumers a fortune.


backwood
The title alone is full of it. The real farmers today still work their butts off every day. I know of some guys who finance through MASC or FCC, only to borrow themselves into huge debt. Then in turn the govt dictates when you sell. That's not farming, you've now become a serf. A farmer is cash poor for the majority of his life until he sells off everything but by then his body is so broken down he can't do much anyway.


Curtis Stone
The biggest misconception today, regarding young people getting into farming, is that you have to own your own land. The most successful young farmers I see today, lease or rent land. A way cheaper and less risky option. SPIN farmers are grossing $100,000 / acre by focusing on high value crops, grown near city centres, and sold direct to the consumer. This is the new farming model going forward. Commodity based ag will be reserved for people who can inherit land, and that's a very small percentage. For the rest of us, small scale diversified farms are going to be the best may to make a good living from agriculture.


Georooney
Give me a break, please. My kid brother farmed all his life, inheriting his father's land, and neither got rich. Correction: neither even broke even.


my_2cents_worth
Farming can be a multi-million dollar business IF you farm 1000's of acres and diversify. I live in farm country all my life and myself live on a small farm. The small family farm cannot compete with the big conglomerates. I know many neighbors who 'farm' cattle and crops - but their full time jobs are NOT their farm - they work either on another big conglomerate farm or in a factory or have skilled trade (welding, plumbing etc) which is their main income. The wives also work. 

So while it is nice to say that youth are drawn to farming it is in fact NOT the small family farm that they are moving towards - it is the Agriculture Business - Veterinary work, Feed services, Building and Construction, Heavy Equipment, Genetics, Chemistry etc that are all part of farming this day and age. 

Most people who work in agriculture likely don't own cash crop / livestock farms or if they are on land raise only enough to supplement their own income or as a 'hobby'. Youth who get into Ag Business do so in the trades mentioned above mostly.


Studentofthegame
I spent my summers as a teenager working as a farm-hand at a 6-acre organic vegetable farm. The lifestyle is hard on the body, but very healthy. The farmers managed their land carefully, and also became a distributor for organic foods in general. They did fairly well, as far as I know. But, as fondly as I regard those years, and as great as I looked/felt after each summer was over, I don't think I could be a career farmer. It grinds you down. Then again, I'm not sure how much actual work the farmers do on bigger farms. :)


QuebecAnglo
This is good news. If farming returns a decent living, profit and retirement for hard working farmers, then more will go into it. However, it is capital intensive and history shows that there are things beyond a farmer's control. Weather. Markets. Economy. 

I'm impressed with the Hambly operation that packages and sells their produce. This puts them closer to the market pulse and improves their revenue stream. 

So, young farmers, buy crop insurance and put cash aside in the best years to weather through the bad years - don't come coming to the government for handouts in those bad years. Manage that yourself. 

Otherwise you're no different than Wall Street's "private profits and public losses." 

(Notice that in good years you don't hear anything from farmers - but in bad they want handouts).



refugian
Used to be that 200 acres would support a family, now it takes thousands. Five years ago we bought our marginal 150 acres with house and barn here for 50 k. Good farmland at the time sold for 300$ per acre, this year we have cash croppers arrived and offering 1000$ per acre and most people accepting gratefully, one such has purchased 3000 acres and now clearing more, pulling out fences, putting in soil drains, and hopes to plough and seed winter wheat before winter, next year canola. I'm speaking of north eastern Ontario, (Cochrane) if you can put up with the climate, there is potential here for any woud-be farmer, still good land available and lots of marginal.



Helen Highwater
@refugian It depends on where and the kind of farming. A woman in Oak Bay (Victoria, BC) is making a good living farming in 13 backyards. It's call Small Plot Intensive (SPIN) farming, and lots of young people are making a living doing it.


SPIN Farming. It's done intensively on small plots, with sales direct to the consumer at farmer's markets, CSA box programs, etc.


Mary Fosset
We're 3 or 4 generation city dwellers. My son who didn't know a blade of grass from hay learned about farming on a trip out west. He bought some Alberta land, grows a variety of crops, his wife takes care of small animals. My son switched from a Bay St. Toronto desk job to the farm and his kids and wife are loving it. He hopes to expand and hopefully one of my grandkids will continue.



